He’s 65 years old, he is a European member of parliament.
It’s is second electoral presidential candidature race.
. His creed: The unsubmissive France. His slogan: The people’s force. Good evening Jean-Luc Mélenchon.
Good evening ladies and gentlemen
Good evening Jean-Luc Mélenchon. Welcome.
To start these talks, we asked each candidate to bring us an object that they would keep in their presidential office,
if they would be elected, an iconic object of who they are or of their project. Jean-Luc Mélenchon, what is your object?
Well, it was not the simplest thing to find. It’s this, an alarm clock. It’s there to tell me, morning to night, that it is time.
It is time because climate change has started. We have to change to ways of producing, consuming and exchanging.
It is time to consume, sorry, it is time to get out of nuclear [power and weapons] because it’s dangerous,
, it’s time to distribute wealth in a just manner so that we can live from our labour, our retirement or our studies in dignity It is time to get out of the presidential monarchy.
It is time of an independent France that would be the world champion of peace.
So this alarm clock will be on your presidential desk?
Well miss, of course, because I told you so I will do it.
And, I will tell myself “Work to make yourself useful, profit from this time and opportunity. Work to be useful and you will be happy.”
I have the same message to my fellow citizen: let’s work to make ourselves useful, to humanity, and we will have happy lives.
So, two precisions on your economic program first JLM. First you want to establish a right of opposition to work. What does it mean?
Does it mean that every unemployed (on employment insurance) will be able to, in last resort, turn against the state and that the state will have to give him a job?
So, first it is not the only point in the program, but it is the one you have chosen in it, and since it’s interesting I will talk about it.
The constitution says that everyone has the right to a job and the duty to work. It’s in the constitution.
So what is the value of principles that have no concrete conclusions?
And I therefor imagined that we would take a law that exist, which we might modify the applicable conditions, if needed.
. Already, in the view of experiencer, we call this law “TDCarmon” because they came up with the idea,
, and it is a member of parliament from the PS (socialist party) that brought it and adopted it to unanimity.
It means that every person that is unemployed for a long time, anyway, represents a cost, in allocations, in the setting up here and there of assistance.
In short, instead of having the money come in this way, we concentrate it to make a salary and we complete it, and we install this person in a cooperative contract.
Personally I think we should put it at 5 years, during which time this person can, if we wishes to of course, the point is not to do forced labour, can take a job that is proposed by a cooperative.
So the state, you specify it in your program…
The state finance the cooperative, which itself finance the rest of the salary that needs to be provided.
The state is obligated to provide work for any person that’s been unemployed for more than a year. <Well of course, and here’s why: otherwise>
Otherwise we attack the state? What will happen?
Well of course, because otherwise it’s not worth it to write in the constitution things that we don’t apply. So me, I will apply them.
And I was there, in Juratri, before yesterday, and we could see how, to give you an example of the countless things to do in this country.
They have organised a waste collection, you know like this alarm, and they sort it out. It’s an urban mine. And so who is there?
People who take care of the ones who come in to work, because often these people have been injured in/by life. Why am I giving you this example?
Because I want to show you that it already exist, jobs helped in this manner, of general utility.
And I add that, everyone needs to get something out of it, and not just those who have undertaken great studies or those that have diplomas.
Thank goodness, we are very happy, they too must have work, but also the brave people that just want to live their lives, with a salary that gives them the opportunity to have a dignified life.
And it’s these people that are in my thoughts. You see, 2 thousand dead in the streets in the 5th world power, it’s not admissible. So 9 million poors, it’s not tolerable.
So another measure, you want to tax the very high salaries <yes> with 90% taxes on revenue <But who talked about salary?!>
…The revenue <Yes, that’s it>, so the revenue, in general. Let’s get back to it, to sum it up, starting from 30 to 35 000/month, the state would take almost everything.
Does it concern everyone, including the creators, the artists, the footballers, the athletes?
I was expecting the footballer, but it is not the most common case. What is the most important to understand is that yes, I am a bearer of the life philosophy in which to accumulate without limits is not considered a good thing.
Today it’s the opposite. We say “be billionaires”. Naturally nobody makes it, except for a very small amount of people, but, in the theme that everybody can do it, we disorganize everything.
So yes, from a certain point, like have done the USA a certain time, we tax at 90%, because at 100% it would be confiscatory and that’s not possible.
It’s the idea of a maximum salary
Well there it is. There are two aspects. There is the aspect of the maximum revenue, because anyway, on top of the tax fork, you know that I’m creating 14 tax brackets to spread the effort,
so the middle class can stop supporting everything on its back since some do not want to pay when they have a lot.
So I spread it out, and yes at the last bracket we take the 90%, which leaves them 34 000 euros per month, that’s more than enough. Yes?
Do you not fear, Mr. Mélenchon, that in an open world, the [job] creators, including <no, I do not fear it>, decide to go establish themselves somewhere else?
No, I do not fear it, and this is for two reasons. The first is that a lot of them are patriots and they love their country, and they do not leave simply by the reason of their wallet.
The second reason is that it concern very few people you know, more then 34 000 euros. My goal is not to confiscate, that’s not my objective.
My objective is that everyone contributes in proportion to their capabilities. Consequently, I am totally in favour to establish a particular framework for people whose revenue goes through very pronounced variations from a year to another.
the footballers for example that plays for 10 years, and then
Yes, here. So starting from a certain age, I don’t know which, they can’t play the same at level of football anymore. So we can perfectly imagine that during a period of years they have a tax that is proportional
but that keeps in consideration that a portion is put in reserve so that we can evaluate the total at the end. All this is technical.
What is important is to say that everybody is participating in proportion to their abilities, and we stop with the current situation.
For those who would flee, they can go wherever they want, I encourage them to travel across the world as much as they want, though not by plane because it’s quite polluting.
But they can do whatever they want; anyway the tax will be universal.
You just have to be French, and from this you will pay your taxes wherever you are to France, for the part that is left to pay, because naturally we pay taxes in the country we are in. No?
Jean-Luc Mélenchon, you have in your disposition, like every other candidate, a white card, a master card,
meaning one measure that you have brought forward during this campaign, which you would like to bring back here today, 3 days from the vote.
Thank you, yes. It’s very difficult to choose which when you got 357 in your booklet, but I thought the most important and that would maybe resume better this idea of “the force of the people”.
It is that the time has come to put an end to the presidential monarchy and to the caste that is there in between private and state affairs,
that command everything, that is most often unpunished whatever its actions, and that conduct the general affairs to serve its own interests.
This is the reason why I think that we must convoke an constituent assembly, where the people will redefine the political rules of this country,
what is permitted and prohibited, what we have to do and what are the rights that each individual recognizes mutually to each other.
It will be the refounding of the French people’s nation.
When will it be? Just after your election?
Yes, but, anyway, there’s no fire you know. So we start by convoking the constituent, they take the time it takes to work on the subject.
They will be people that have never been elected anywhere before so that they are not stuck in old ways, and during this time
will they be chosen at random?
I think there needs to be a part that is chosen at random, of course.
It means that our new constitution will be established by people chosen at random.
You have well understood that some are elected are the others chosen randomly. Now the proportion is still to be decided.
But the idea of choosing at random is so that this constituent is not entirely the result of the normal vote of people
who will have to judge and choose between a presidential or parliamentary regime, but that will also, wholly coming from the people of France.
You know the sitting jury, they take nonetheless the most serious decisions. Perpetuity, before that it used to be death well all those people where chosen at random.
More simple though, and guided by magistrates, then to write and propose a new constitution.
Yes but people are not crazy, they’re not stupid. Without a doubt there might be the need for an initial proposition, why not?
The president or the government will make one, and then they will get to work. But while they work, naturally the country is governed.
Governed in the frame of the 5th republic and with the means of the 5th republic, and trust me to use all of its powers.
But then in this new constitution, you advocate the setting up of a revocatory referendum. Which means a million, maybe a million and a half could sign, and have held a referendum for or against the head of state.
Everybody, even the general corner councillor, the mayor, there. <at all levels> yes <including the head of state> <yes>.
When looking at the political climate of the country, we see that it’s very divided, we see it’s very opposed, tense, does it not make France ungovernable?
No, because first, we should not think that the French are a bunch of agitated people that want to intervene and shuffle everything up.
. They want, at the same time, stabilised institutions, and I agree, I don’t like fighting. And secondly, they want to be able to intervene in a decisive manner.
Imagine for example Mr. Pujadas, that the constituent comes to decide the statute of president for 7 years, unrenewable.
It can decide so. Well you will have the possibility along the way to tell it “it will not be 7 years it will only be 5 or 4 years”.
But look at the state of opinions of the previous 5 years mandate, or the one before. They have an incredible opposition.
Yes but Mr. The institutions are made to organise pacifically the life of a people as agitated as ours, and as passionate. And now you are here. So if you have reasons to
so you are not afraid of it being ungovernable?> Never in my life! Why would it be ungovernable?
I have seen two American states do it, there are 2 or 3 Latino states that do it and it’s not a permanent mess, it’s the opposite.
But people have the power, you understand?
It changes everyone’s mentality to know that people can work on accumulating the number of signatures that allows to form a revocatory referendum.
Be real my friends, it’s called democracy. We can’t be afraid of the people.
But the philosophy of your 6th republic, Jean-Luc Mélenchon, is to decentralize to a more horizontal democracy.
Are you sure the moment is right to have this, when we see in the world people like Donald Trump or Vladimir Putin, rasthabere (?) et Erdoğan, can we take the risk of having a power that is not strong.
Well the power will be strong as long as the people consent. No power is strong when no one wants it. You can imagine a president that has monarchical powers
like this one, and you can clearly see that it’s not working.
You can’t call a power strong like what exists now. We only get strength from popular support and endorsement. And when you don't have it anymore you leave.
The Général de Gaulle did it. The day he proposed a referendum, the people said no and he left. It’s the others, since then, whatever the vote.
Speaking of, you that mention often the Général de Gaulle, the spirit <oh well often…> yes, yes, often cited in your speech,
the spirit of the 5th republic, this meeting of a man and a people, it’s so you. So why do you want to change so much?
Well because, and you are very kind to say it’s totally  me, but I don’t see things like this. I think strength comes from collective intelligence.
Of course everyone must assume the role that is given to them, the mandate, but we have to stay under a control and a rapport.
A head of state, a counsellor, a mayor that would not talk with anyone, that does not try to convince anyone.
That’s not someone elected by the people, it’s something else. We are not in an aristocratic regime, we are in a democratic regime.
Trust in the intelligence of the people, trust in collective intelligence and you will see, it will work. Because our people are cultivated and is educated.
. And let me tell you one thing. A constituent, the first of its functions, is to re-establish the French people. Because people will discuss among themselves, like right now for the elections, there’s discussions in all families.
Well imagine this in a constituent. People will talk. Do you prefer this, do you prefer that?
I heard that they want to recognise rights to nature. One will say “are you crazy? What a weird idea! And so on. For the animals! For the animals, Mr Mélenchon? But where are you going?!
And so on. And this collective passion will reformat the French people, which has changed so much since the beginning of the 5th republic.
It’s not a rural nation anymore, it’s a mixed people, a people that come and goes. It’s time to rebuilt France together, so that then it will belong to us all.
So now, two questions on your foreign policy, we often caricature you sometimes to Russia. But when you say that you want to get out of NATO,
that you defy NATO, that you do not want a defensive Europe because you say it would be war as you say.
Or that we could renegotiate our frontiers in Europe, does it not place you by these facts on the side of Russia?
My position, I want to make it clear, is that I recognize no master and no enemies of France. Not the Russians, nor the Americans or the Chinese will ever be our masters, at least if it’s me that takes care of it.
And they are also not enemies because France has always recognized nations, and not regimes or single persons. So there. In the frequent objections that I am presented to, often they are not serious.
We should first talk about those 3 projects, because, we have the impression that you are changing the position of France. Traditionally, the USA, the Occident, are our allies, and that you are re-centering it, bringing it closer to the side of Russia.
You are right. I am for an independent France that is a world champion of peace, so there for strongly oriented toward a system like the UN,
because it’s the only organisation in which all nations are represented and can participate.
I am there for hostile toward all the G8s, G20s, and all these little rich people clubs that impose their law on the world. It is better to go to the UN to discuss and to move forward.
A lot of things move forward because of the UN, and today the UN is threatened by USA’s politics that remove their credits here, remove their credits there, and in consequence weaken this universal institution.
It is threatened by the divisions in the world, as during the cold war, when one uses their right to veto, it paralyses everything. Yes, but there is still some good to talk to each other, and it is better than to flex out muscles and to bring out the cannons every 5 minutes.
But in depth, Mr. Mélenchon> On NATO. Let’s talk about NATO. NATO is an military alliance that was created at a time where there was the cold war.
Where France already had a particular position, you will want to remember, since the defence, the nuclear dissuasion,
is an affirmed stance by the Général de Gaulle that it is dissuasion against everyone and everything. And then we asked him “What do you mean against everyone and everything?
but Mr. Général, you are putting on the same level the Russians and the Americans, and the Général would say “My only concern is with the independence of France.”
Well it’s the same for me. I am in the Gaullo-Mitterranist tradition, I admit it. I believe in the independence of France over everything. NATO
François Mitterrand was also behind the SS20 in front of, and the archive in face of the attempts.
Of course I never changed opinion. I want to correct you on a point. I never proposed a conference to re-discuss the European frontiers.
< No, but you do not exclude the idea>. No! Listen, the frontiers have been questioned. Russia, now, brings Crimea into it’s rank.
Are you in agreement to let the frontier change without saying anything about it? So what do we do? There are two solutions.
The first is to deny it and to put more troops and armies, and it will catch on fire sooner or later, and I am against this, which is why I am not interested in NATO.
I will permit myself to tell you that the last 10 days have particularly proven me right.
Mr. Trump has decided a bombardment without asking anything to anyone, not a single person, on his own. Not even his own congress.
You have to see what we are getting dragged in to with this man if we let things continue.
. So this conference, Miss, this conference is called the OSE(?), the organization exist. And we will discuss of the frontiers that have been modified, to start.
And if the Russian say they feel threatened, because of your behaviour, with the missiles anti-missiles you have installed in Poland, we’ll tell them to get rid of theirs at the frontiers too.
We will be talking. Since the slinky and the 70’s, we do not talk of peace anymore, we stopped talking about nuclear disarmament. Really. It’s an great question.
In a word, in a word on Europe, because time is running out, I would ask you to be brief <one word!?> very brief. You have cited Général de Gaulle, you have cited Mitterrand.
The two of them have sealed the alliance between France and Germany for more than 70 years, our strategic choice.
Will you be the one to assume the breakup of this Franco-German couple? But never in my life! Why would I do this?!
It’s only about having a dialogue with Germany and a negotiation. For now the French presidents contented themselves with getting there and asking where to sign. All this is absurd.
Two French presidents have betrayed the people’s words. The first time he was going to sign no, he signed yes, that was Mr. Sarkozy.
And the second said he would renegotiate the budgetary treaties, and he renegotiated absolutely nothing,
so <Maybe he had a 9 (?) from Mme. Merkel> no no no. Mme. Merkel was asked nothing from no one. So we will have a discussion. The German are neither our enemies nor our masters.
They are our partners, and we must explain to them the difficulty in which is the 2nd continental economy. This will be the discussion.
We will say there are four lines we need to change. First, the European central bank cannot only be in charge of stabilising prices. Then we have to socially harmonise, so we have to stop with the interdictions
Fiscal harmony, so Mr. Juncker is asked to give us backs our money.
Then, we must have, on the European frontiers, protectionist solidarity, and finally we cannot accept austerity politics as the only norm.
And if it’s 9, and if it’s 9?(?) Will you tell us, 3 days from the vote, if we get out of the EU?
Are you expecting me to tell you this on this show? Who do you think you are talking to? I’m about to govern this country.
And you think I’m going to tell you here for your entertainment if < no, from reading your> Here is how I will negotiate, here is what I will do. No!
I said what I had to say. There are 4 questions that need to be modified.  We will have a discussion.
But the idea that France can let itself be dominated and submitted to something that she does not agree to will not exist with me.
This is why I say “we change it, or we leave it.” This is why I think our partners will then want us to stay, because there is no Europe without France. Do you know this?
We have one minute left have we have two questions to ask you <in one minute!?> in a quick minute yes, because they are slightly more personal questions.
First, in your career. We found this picture, where you were a young senator at the side of François Mitterrand.
I wasn’t that young anymore at that time, and my tie was quite awful.
Have you ever considered, Jean-Luc Mélenchon, to do something else than politics?
It happened that my life pushed me to it, and that circumstances gave me the opportunity to do so with great freedoms, because my spirit is so independent I really got on the nerves of a lot of people,
and I believe I have irritated more then once president Mitterrand, who would tell me when starting an discussion “don’t start with your religious mantras”.
But I loved him a lot, and I try to step in his own steps. While what results I conclude from politics, here it is (book: A future in common [together]).
Here is an evaluation, and it is worth more than all the trails without an end.
This will be the conclusion and it will be the same question for everyone. The campaign is coming to an end.
Is there one regret on this campaign, something you did not do or that you said, that you regret <Ah, about the campaign?> yes
No. I on the contrary have a lot of enthusiasm and gratitude toward all the manifestation and forms of friendship that has been given to me, and especially to have had formidable teams all around me.
And now you see, hour to hour, tons of people speaking up for me and so even say they will vote for me on the second turn, but first I need to get to it!
Well, here it is, the red light has turned on. Thank you Jean-Luc Mélenchon and we will see you later for your conclusion.